Functions
In terms of Bash scripting, we can think
of a function as a script within a script,
which is useful when we need to execute
the same code multiple times.
Rather than re-writing the same chunk of
code over and over,
we can write it once as a function and
then call that function as needed.
Put another way, a function is a
subroutine, or a code block
that implements a set of operations– a
“black box” that performs a specific task.
Functions may be written in two different
formats.
The first format is more common to Bash
scripts.
The second format is more familiar to C
programmers.
The formats are functionally identical
and are a matter of personal preference.
Consider this simple example.
In this script, we declare a function
called print me..
…that simply echoes a line to the screen.
We then call the function by its name to
execute it.
Functions can also accept arguments.
In this case, we pass a random number
into the function…
…which outputs it as $1, the function’s
first argument.
Note that the function definition
contains parentheses.
In other programming languages, such as C,
these would contain the expected
arguments, but in Bash
the parentheses serve only as decoration
and are never used.
Also note that the function definition
must appear in the script
before it is called.
Logically, we can’t call something
we’ve not defined.
Let’s run this script to verify that it
works.
In addition to passing arguments to Bash
functions,
we can return values from them as well.
Bash functions do not actually allow you
to return an arbitrary value
in the traditional sense.
Instead, a Bash function can return an
exit status,
like zero for success and non-zero for
failure,
or some other arbitrary value that we can
later access from the
dollar-question-mark global variable.
Alternatively, we can set a global
variable inside the function
or use command substitution to simulate a
traditional return.
This basic example returns a random
number into dollar-question-mark.
Notice that a random number is returned
every time we run the script.
This is because we returned the special
global variable $RANDOM
into dollar-question-mark.
If we used the return statement without
the $RANDOM argument,
the exit status of the function
(which is 0 in this case)
would be returned instead.
Now that we have a basic understanding of
variables and functions,
we can dig deeper and discuss variable
scope.
The scope of a variable is simply the
context in which it has meaning.
By default, a variable has a global scope,
meaning it can be accessed throughout the
entire script.
In contrast, a local variable can only
be seen within the function,
lock of code, or subshell in which it is
defined.
We can “overlay” a global variable,
giving it a local context,
by preceding the declaration with the
local keyword…
…leaving the global variable untouched.
Let’s see how local and global variables
work in practice with a simple example.
Let’s highlight a few key points within
this code.
First note that we declare two global
variables,
setting name1 to John and name2 to Jason.
Then, we define a function and inside
that function,
declare a local variable called name1,
setting the value to Edward.
Since this is a local variable,
the previous global assignment is not
affected.
name1 will still be set to John outside
this function.
Next, we set name2 to Lucas.
Since we did not use the local keyword,
we are changing the global variable,
and the assignment sticks both inside and
outside of the function.
Let’s run this script to see it in action.
Based on this example, we know that
changing the value of a local variable
with the same name as a global one will
not affect its global value.
We’ve also verified that changing the
value of a global variable inside of a
function – without having declared a
local variable with the same name –
will affect its global value.